105.md, before:

NIP-105
======

API Service Marketplace
-------------------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:coachchuckff` `author:unclejim21` `author:cmdruid`

This NIP defines `kind:31402` (a _parameterized replaceable event_) for broadcasting API services, endpoints and their costs in mSats. API services are offered ala carte to be paid via lightning invoices.

API service providers will issue a `kind:31402` event as an API service offering. Clients can fetch `s` (service) tag offerings, call their endpoints, and pay per use. Creating an API service marketplace.

## Protocol flow

1. API Service provider creates and hosts API service offerings, they then issue a `kind:31402` event for each `s` ( service ) tag.
2. Client fetches API offerings by `s` tag.
3. Client chooses a provider(s) and POSTs to their `endpoint`. The POST body should match exactly what is required by the underlying API less the API key. ( Or following the note's `schema` )
4. The service provider should validate their request and return a lightning invoice with a `successAction` url. The `successAction` url should be formatted as such: `<endpoint>/<invoice_hash>/get_result`
5. The client pays.
6. The client will poll the `successAction` until the service provider has returned the result(s) matching exactly what the underlying API will produce ( Or following the note's `outputSchema` ).

## Server Functions
### Create Invoice

Initally, the client will make a POST request to the `endpoint`. The POST body should be exactly what the underlying API is expecting less the API key. This information should also be represented in the `schema` portion of the `content` field.

The service provider will then do the following:

1. Validate their API request
2. Issue a lightning invoice

The issued lightning invoice will contain a `successAction` url formatted as so:

```typescript
{
      tag: "url",
      url: `https://example.api/chat/${paymentHash}/get_result`,
      description: "Open to get the confirmation code for your purchase."
}
```

From here the service provider can either listen and execute their API request "on-payment" or wait until the client calls `get_results`.

### Calculating Pricing
Pricing may be calculated using the equation:
Total Cost = (cost_variable) * cost_units + cost_flat

This allows servers to offer fair & sustainable pricing based on the resources required to provide the service. Likewise this edit on the spec allows backward compatibility with previous pricing (which was flat only) as well as new use cases/business models.

One example would be a voice to text transcription service. The rate may be in seconds and the cost_variable may be 200 msats and cost_flat is 1000 msats. Therfore a 100 second transcription job should cost 21000 msats.

### Get Results

Once the client has gotten the `successAction` url, they can issue a GET request. The service provider should respond in one of three ways:

1. 200 ( DONE ) - the service provider returns the results of the API as if it was coming from the product itself ( Errors included ) 
2. 202 ( WORKING ) - the service provider returns a status that indicates the results are not ready yet.
3. 402 ( NOT PAID YET ) - the service provider should respond with a 402 error if the client has not paid yet.

It is up to the Client to poll the `successAction` until a terminal result is reached.

## (optional) Zap Request / Receipt

This specification is designed to optionally support the use of zap requests and receipts as a form of proof of payment between the client and service. A receipt represents that the client has purchased a service from the endpoint, which can further be used for publishing metrics, reviews, and other forms of engagement over the nostr network.

### Offer Event

When the service publishes an offer event, the service may include a `receipt` tag, with the value set to `true`.

Example: `tags: [ [ "receipt": true ] ]`

This indicates that the provider supports the issuance of [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) zap receipts.

### Zap Request

When the client makes the initial `POST` request to the service `endpoint`, the client may choose to include a `zap-request` attribute in the header of the request. The value of the `zap-request` attribute should be a valid `kind 9734` zap request event, serialized as a JSON string.

The content field of the zap request should be identical to the body of the POST request, serialized as a JSON string.

The zap request should include an `a` tag that references the `kind:31402` offer event, as specified in [NIP-01](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md):

`["a", <kind integer>:<32-bytes lowercase hex of a pubkey>:<d tag value>, <recommended relay URL, optional>]`

The zap request should follow all standard conventions as defined in the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

### Lightning Invoice

When the service responds with a lightning invoice, if the client POST request has specified a valid `zap-request` in the header, then the description hash of the invoice MUST match the sha256 hash of the complete zap request as a serialized JSON string. This behavior is defined as part of the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

### Zap Receipt

If the service responds to a `successAction` url request with a `200` range status code, and if the client POST request had previously specified a valid `zap-request` in the header, the service should include a `zap-receipt` attribute in the header of the response. This `zap-receipt` attribute should include a valid `kind 9735` zap receipt, serialized as a JSON string.

The zap request should follow all standard conventions as defined in the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

In addition to serving the `zap-receipt` within the header of the response, the service may choose to publish the zap receipt to a relay.

## Event Reference and Examples

### Offering Event

`kind:31402`

`.content` should be a JSON stringified version of the following JSON:
```typescript
  enum OfferingStatus {
    up = 'UP',
    down = 'DOWN',
    closed = 'CLOSED'
  }

  enum CostUnits {
    mins = 'MINS',
    secs = 'SECS',
    tokens = 'TOKENS'
  }

  interface OfferingContent = {
    endpoint: string,          // The POST endpoint you call to pay/fetch
    status: OfferingStatus,    // UP/DOWN/CLOSED
    cost_fixed: number,        // The fixed per call cost in mSats (b in y = mx + b)
    cost_variable: number,     // The variable cost based on request's units (i.e. 2000msats per min)
    cost_units: number,        //The units that denominate the variable cost
    schema?: Object,           // Reccomended - JSON schema for the POST body of the endpoint
    outputSchema?: Object,     // Reccomended - JSON schema for the response of the call
    description?: string       // Optional - Description for the end user
  }
```

`.tag` MUST include the following:

- `s`, the service tag should simply be the underlying API endpoint of the service provided. For example if you are offering a ChatGPT service, you would set `s` = `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions`. This way the service they are buying is implicit.
- `d`, following **parameterized replaceable events** in [NIP-01](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md), this tag allows this event to be replaceable. Since there should only be one service per pubkey, the `d` tag should match the `s` tag.

### Example Service Event

```typescript

const content = {
  endpoint: "https://example.api/chat/",
  status: "UP",
  cost: 5000,
  schema: {...},
  outputSchema: {...},
  description: "This will call the ChatGPT endpoint"
}

const event = {
  "kind": 31402,
  "created_at": 1675642635,
  "content": JSON.stringify(content),
  "tags": [
    ["s", "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"]
    ["d", "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"],
  ],
  "pubkey": "<pubkey>",
  "id": "<id>"
}
```

### Example Schema

The following is for the `gpt-3.5-turbo` input schema:

```json
{
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "model": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": ["gpt-3.5-turbo"]
        },
        "messages": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "role": {
                        "type": "string",
                        "enum": ["system", "user"]
                    },
                    "content": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": ["role", "content"]
            },
            "minItems": 1
        }
    },
    "required": ["model", "messages"]
}
```

The following is for the `gpt-3.5-turbo` output schema:

```json
{
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["id", "object", "created", "model", "choices", "usage"],
    "properties": {
      "id": {
        "type": "string",
        "pattern": "^chatcmpl-[a-zA-Z0-9-]+$"
      },
      "object": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["chat.completion"]
      },
      "created": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "model": {
        "type": "string"
      },
      "choices": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "required": ["index", "message"],
          "properties": {
            "index": {
              "type": "integer"
            },
            "message": {
              "type": "object",
              "required": ["role", "content"],
              "properties": {
                "role": {
                  "type": "string",
                  "enum": ["assistant"]
                },
                "content": {
                  "type": "string"
                }
              }
            },
            "finish_reason": {
              "type": "string",
              "enum": ["stop"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "usage": {
        "type": "object",
        "required": ["prompt_tokens", "completion_tokens", "total_tokens"],
        "properties": {
          "prompt_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          },
          "completion_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          },
          "total_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
```
### Safey

It is not mandatory, but to raise the barrier to entry, clients should screen service provider's NIP-05 identifier. The domain used in their NIP-05, should be the same domain used for their endpoint.

Clients may wish to create a whitelist of trusted service providers once tested.

### Problems

- No data integrity - service providers can store/redistribute any data passed to them
- Service providers could take payment and never return the product
- Service providers are not gaurenteed to call the endpoint specified in the `s` tag
- No recourse for errored API fetches
- The `cost` field may not match the actual final price
- No proof of purchase

### Example Implementations

- [Server](https://github.com/Team-Pleb-TabConf-2023/nip-105-server)
- [Client](https://github.com/Team-Pleb-TabConf-2023/nip-105-client)

Commit message:

drafting update to include review

105.md, after:

NIP-105
======

API Service Marketplace
-------------------------------

`draft` `optional` `author:coachchuckff` `author:unclejim21` `author:cmdruid`

This NIP defines `kind:31402` (a _parameterized replaceable event_) for broadcasting API services, endpoints and their costs in mSats. API services are offered ala carte to be paid via lightning invoices.

API service providers will issue a `kind:31402` event as an API service offering. Clients can fetch `s` (service) tag offerings, call their endpoints, and pay per use. Creating an API service marketplace.

## Protocol flow

1. API Service provider creates and hosts API service offerings, they then issue a `kind:31402` event for each `s` ( service ) tag.
2. Client fetches API offerings by `s` tag.
3. Client chooses a provider(s) and POSTs to their `endpoint`. The POST body should match exactly what is required by the underlying API less the API key. ( Or following the note's `schema` )
4. The service provider should validate their request and return a lightning invoice with a `successAction` url. The `successAction` url should be formatted as such: `<endpoint>/<invoice_hash>/get_result`
5. The client pays.
6. The client will poll the `successAction` until the service provider has returned the result(s) matching exactly what the underlying API will produce ( Or following the note's `outputSchema` ).

## Server Functions
### Create Invoice

Initally, the client will make a POST request to the `endpoint`. The POST body should be exactly what the underlying API is expecting less the API key. This information should also be represented in the `schema` portion of the `content` field.

The service provider will then do the following:

1. Validate their API request
2. Issue a lightning invoice

The issued lightning invoice will contain a `successAction` url formatted as so:

```typescript
{
      tag: "url",
      url: `https://example.api/chat/${paymentHash}/get_result`,
      description: "Open to get the confirmation code for your purchase."
}
```

From here the service provider can either listen and execute their API request "on-payment" or wait until the client calls `get_results`.

### Calculating Pricing
Pricing may be calculated using the equation:
Total Cost = (cost_variable) * cost_units + cost_flat

This allows servers to offer fair & sustainable pricing based on the resources required to provide the service. Likewise this edit on the spec allows backward compatibility with previous pricing (which was flat only) as well as new use cases/business models.

One example would be a voice to text transcription service. The rate may be in seconds and the cost_variable may be 200 msats and cost_flat is 1000 msats. Therfore a 100 second transcription job should cost 21000 msats.

### Get Results

Once the client has gotten the `successAction` url, they can issue a GET request. The service provider should respond in one of three ways:

1. 200 ( DONE ) - the service provider returns the results of the API as if it was coming from the product itself ( Errors included ) 
2. 202 ( WORKING ) - the service provider returns a status that indicates the results are not ready yet.
3. 402 ( NOT PAID YET ) - the service provider should respond with a 402 error if the client has not paid yet.

It is up to the Client to poll the `successAction` until a terminal result is reached.

## (optional) Zap Request / Receipt

This specification is designed to optionally support the use of zap requests and receipts as a form of proof of payment between the client and service. A receipt represents that the client has purchased a service from the endpoint, which can further be used for publishing metrics, reviews, and other forms of engagement over the nostr network.

### Offer Event

When the service publishes an offer event, the service may include a `receipt` tag, with the value set to `true`.

Example: `tags: [ [ "receipt": true ] ]`

This indicates that the provider supports the issuance of [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) zap receipts.

### Zap Request

When the client makes the initial `POST` request to the service `endpoint`, the client may choose to include a `zap-request` attribute in the header of the request. The value of the `zap-request` attribute should be a valid `kind 9734` zap request event, serialized as a JSON string.

The content field of the zap request should be identical to the body of the POST request, serialized as a JSON string.

The zap request should include an `a` tag that references the `kind:31402` offer event, as specified in [NIP-01](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md):

`["a", <kind integer>:<32-bytes lowercase hex of a pubkey>:<d tag value>, <recommended relay URL, optional>]`

The zap request should follow all standard conventions as defined in the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

### Lightning Invoice

When the service responds with a lightning invoice, if the client POST request has specified a valid `zap-request` in the header, then the description hash of the invoice MUST match the sha256 hash of the complete zap request as a serialized JSON string. This behavior is defined as part of the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

### Zap Receipt

If the service responds to a `successAction` url request with a `200` range status code, and if the client POST request had previously specified a valid `zap-request` in the header, the service should include a `zap-receipt` attribute in the header of the response. This `zap-receipt` attribute should include a valid `kind 9735` zap receipt, serialized as a JSON string.

The zap request should follow all standard conventions as defined in the [NIP-57](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/57.md) specification.

In addition to serving the `zap-receipt` within the header of the response, the service may choose to publish the zap receipt to a relay.

## Event Reference and Examples

### Offering Event

`kind:31402`

`.content` should be a JSON stringified version of the following JSON:
```typescript
  enum OfferingStatus {
    up = 'UP',
    down = 'DOWN',
    closed = 'CLOSED'
  }

  enum CostUnits {
    mins = 'MINS',
    secs = 'SECS',
    tokens = 'TOKENS'
  }

  interface OfferingContent = {
    endpoint: string,          // The POST endpoint you call to pay/fetch
    status: OfferingStatus,    // UP/DOWN/CLOSED
    cost_fixed: number,        // The fixed per call cost in mSats (b in y = mx + b)
    cost_variable: number,     // The variable cost based on request's units (i.e. 2000msats per min)
    cost_units: number,        //The units that denominate the variable cost
    schema?: Object,           // Reccomended - JSON schema for the POST body of the endpoint
    outputSchema?: Object,     // Reccomended - JSON schema for the response of the call
    description?: string       // Optional - Description for the end user
  }
```

### Review Event

`kind:31200`

`.content` should be a JSON stringified version of the following JSON:
```typescript

  interface ReviewContent = {
    service_provider_pubkey: string,          // Pubkey of the service provider you used
    zap_receipt_json: string, //Stringified JSON of the zap receipt the service provider provided you with
  }
```

`.tag` MUST include the following:

- `s`, the service tag should simply be the underlying API endpoint of the service provided. For example if you are offering a ChatGPT service, you would set `s` = `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions`. This way the service they are buying is implicit.
- `d`, following **parameterized replaceable events** in [NIP-01](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md), this tag allows this event to be replaceable. Since there should only be one service per pubkey, the `d` tag should match the `s` tag.

### Example Service Event

```typescript

const content = {
  endpoint: "https://example.api/chat/",
  status: "UP",
  cost: 5000,
  schema: {...},
  outputSchema: {...},
  description: "This will call the ChatGPT endpoint"
}

const event = {
  "kind": 31402,
  "created_at": 1675642635,
  "content": JSON.stringify(content),
  "tags": [
    ["s", "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"]
    ["d", "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"],
  ],
  "pubkey": "<pubkey>",
  "id": "<id>"
}
```

### Example Schema

The following is for the `gpt-3.5-turbo` input schema:

```json
{
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "model": {
            "type": "string",
            "enum": ["gpt-3.5-turbo"]
        },
        "messages": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "role": {
                        "type": "string",
                        "enum": ["system", "user"]
                    },
                    "content": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": ["role", "content"]
            },
            "minItems": 1
        }
    },
    "required": ["model", "messages"]
}
```

The following is for the `gpt-3.5-turbo` output schema:

```json
{
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["id", "object", "created", "model", "choices", "usage"],
    "properties": {
      "id": {
        "type": "string",
        "pattern": "^chatcmpl-[a-zA-Z0-9-]+$"
      },
      "object": {
        "type": "string",
        "enum": ["chat.completion"]
      },
      "created": {
        "type": "integer"
      },
      "model": {
        "type": "string"
      },
      "choices": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "required": ["index", "message"],
          "properties": {
            "index": {
              "type": "integer"
            },
            "message": {
              "type": "object",
              "required": ["role", "content"],
              "properties": {
                "role": {
                  "type": "string",
                  "enum": ["assistant"]
                },
                "content": {
                  "type": "string"
                }
              }
            },
            "finish_reason": {
              "type": "string",
              "enum": ["stop"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "usage": {
        "type": "object",
        "required": ["prompt_tokens", "completion_tokens", "total_tokens"],
        "properties": {
          "prompt_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          },
          "completion_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          },
          "total_tokens": {
            "type": "integer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
```
### Safety

It is not mandatory, but to raise the barrier to entry, clients should screen service provider's NIP-05 identifier. The domain used in their NIP-05, should be the same domain used for their endpoint.

Clients may wish to create a whitelist of trusted service providers once tested.

### Problems

- No data integrity - service providers can store/redistribute any data passed to them
- Service providers could take payment and never return the product
- Service providers are not gaurenteed to call the endpoint specified in the `s` tag
- No recourse for errored API fetches
- The `cost` field may not match the actual final price
- No proof of purchase

### Example Implementations

- [Server](https://github.com/Team-Pleb-TabConf-2023/nip-105-server)
- [Client](https://github.com/Team-Pleb-TabConf-2023/nip-105-client)
